 the mourners to
plod by.

âSad occasions, Mr Kernan began politely.

Mr Bloom closed his eyes and sadly twice bowed his head.

âThe others are putting on their hats, Mr Kernan said. I suppose we
can do so too. We are the last. This cemetery is a treacherous place.

They covered their heads.

âThe reverend gentleman read the service too quickly, donât you
think? Mr Kernan said with reproof.

Mr Bloom nodded gravely looking in the quick bloodshot eyes. Secret
eyes, secretsearching. Mason, I think: not sure. Beside him again. We
are the last. In the same boat. Hope heâll say something else.

Mr Kernan added:

âThe service of the Irish church used in Mount Jerome is simpler, more
impressive I must say.

Mr Bloom gave prudent assent. The language of course was another thing.

Mr Kernan said with solemnity:

âI am the resurrection and the life. That touches a manâs inmost
heart.

âIt does, Mr Bloom said.

Your heart perhaps but what price the fellow in the six feet by two
with his toes to the daisies? No touching that. Seat of the affections.
Broken heart. A pump after all, pumping thousands of gallons of blood
every day. One fine day it gets bunged up: and there you are. Lots of
them lying around here: lungs, hearts, livers. Old rusty pumps: damn
the thing else. The resurrection and the life. Once you are dead you are
dead. That last day idea. Knocking them all up out of their graves. Come
forth, Lazarus! And he came fifth and lost the job. Get up! Last day!
Then every fellow mousing around for his liver and his lights and the
rest of his traps. Find damn all of himself that morning. Pennyweight of
powder in a skull. Twelve grammes one pennyweight. Troy measure.

Corny Kelleher fell into step at their side.

âEverything went off A1, he said. What?

He looked on them from his drawling eye. Policemanâs shoulders. With
your tooraloom tooraloom.

âAs it should be, Mr Kernan said.

âWhat? Eh? Corny Kelleher said.

Mr Kernan assured him.

âWho is that chap behind with Tom Kernan? John Henry Menton asked. I
know his face.

Ned Lambert glanced back.

âBloom, he said, Madame Marion Tweedy that was, is, I mean, the
soprano. Sheâs his wife.

âO, to be sure, John Henry Menton said. I havenât seen her for some
time. She was a finelooking woman. I danced with her, wait, fifteen
seventeen golden years ago, at Mat Dillonâs in Roundtown. And a good
armful she was.

He looked behind through the others.

âWhat is he? he asked. What does he do? Wasnât he in the stationery
line? I fell foul of him one evening, I remember, at bowls.

Ned Lambert smiled.

âYes, he was, he said, in Wisdom Helyâs. A traveller for
blottingpaper.

âIn Godâs name, John Henry Menton said, what did she marry a coon
like that for? She had plenty of game in her then.

âHas still, Ned Lambert said. He does some canvassing for ads.

John Henry Mentonâs large eyes stared ahead.

The barrow turned into a side lane. A portly man, ambushed among the
grasses, raised his hat in homage. The gravediggers touched their caps.

âJohn OâConnell, Mr Power said pleased. He never forgets a friend.

Mr OâConnell shook all their hands in silence. Mr Dedalus said:

âI am come to pay you another visit.

âMy dear Simon, the caretaker answered in a low voice. I donât want
your custom at all.

Saluting Ned Lambert and John Henry Menton he walked on at Martin
Cunninghamâs side puzzling two long keys at his back.

âDid you hear that one, he asked them, about Mulcahy from the Coombe?

âI did not, Martin Cunningham said.

They bent their silk hats in concert and Hynes inclined his ear. The
caretaker hung his thumbs in the loops of his gold watchchain and spoke
in a discreet tone to their vacant smiles.

âThey tell the story, he said, that two drunks came out here one foggy
evening to look for the grave of a friend of theirs. They asked for
Mulcahy from the Coombe and were told where he was buried. After
traipsing about in the fog they found the grave sure enough. One of the
drunks spelt out the name: Terence Mulcahy. The other drunk was blinking
up at a statue of Our Saviour the widow had got put up.

The caretaker blinked up at one of the sepulchres they passed. He
resumed:

âAnd, after blinking up at the sacred figure, Not a bloody bit like
the man, says he. Thatâs not Mulcahy, says he, whoever done it.

Rewarded by smiles he fell back and spoke with Corny Kelleher, accepting
the dockets given him, turning them over and scanning them as he walked.

âThatâs all done with a purpose, Martin Cunningham explained to
Hynes.

âI know, Hynes said. I know that.

âTo cheer a fellow up, Martin Cunningham said. Itâs pure
goodheartedness: damn the thing else.

Mr Bloom admired the caretakerâs prosperous bulk. All want to be on
good terms with him. Decent fellow, John OâConnell, real good sort.
Keys: like Keyesâs ad: no fear of anyone getting out. No passout
checks. Habeas corpus. I must see about that ad after the funeral. Did I
write Ballsbridge on the envelope I took to cover when she disturbed me
writing to Martha? Hope itâs not chucked in the dead letter office.
Be the better of a shave. Grey sprouting beard. Thatâs the first sign
when the hairs come out grey. And temper getting cross. Silver threads
among the grey. Fancy being his wife. Wonder he had the gumption to
propose to any girl. Come out and live in the graveyard. Dangle that
before her. It might thrill her first. Courting death. Shades of night
hovering here with all the dead stretched about. The shadows of the
tombs when churchyards yawn and Daniel OâConnell must be a descendant
I suppose who is this used to say he was a queer breedy man great
catholic all the same like a big giant in the dark. Will oâ the wisp.
Gas of graves. Want to keep her mind off it to conceive at all. Women
especially are so touchy. Tell her a ghost story in bed to make her
sleep. Have you ever seen a ghost? Well, I have. It was a pitchdark
night. The clock was on the stroke of twelve. Still theyâd kiss all
right if properly keyed up. Whores in Turkish graveyards. Learn anything
if taken young. You might pick up a young widow here. Men like that.
Love among the tombstones. Romeo. Spice of pleasure. In the midst of
death we are in life. Both ends meet. Tantalising for the poor dead.
Smell of grilled beefsteaks to the starving. Gnawing their vitals.
Desire to grig people. Molly wanting to do it at the window. Eight
children he has anyway.

He has seen a fair share go under in his time, lying around him field
after field. Holy fields. More room if they buried them standing.
Sitting or kneeling you couldnât. Standing? His head might come
up some day above ground in a landslip with his hand pointing. All
honeycombed the ground must be: oblong cells. And very neat he keeps it
too: trim grass and edgings. His garden Major Gamble calls Mount Jerome.
Well, so it is. Ought to be flowers of sleep. Chinese cemeteries with
giant poppies growing produce the best opium Mastiansky told me. The
Botanic Gardens are just over there. Itâs the blood sinking in
the earth gives new life. Same idea those jews they said killed
the christian boy. 